RFC: Stylesheet deduplication for SSR (#90)
salesforce/lwc-rfcs: text/0000-ssr-stylesheet-deduplication.md

---
title: Stylesheet deduplication for SSR
status: DRAFTED
created_at: 2024-12-04
updated_at: 2024-12-04
pr: https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/90
---

# Stylesheet deduplication for SSR

## Summary

In Server-Side Rendering (SSR) of web components, a common problem is that `<style>`s are duplicated when rendering multiple Declarative Shadow DOM (DSD) trees. This can contribute to performance problems, in particular for HTML parsing and style calculation. 

This RFC proposes a new API to address this problem by deduplicating rendered `<style>`s into special
vanilla web components that push deduplicated styles into `shadowRoot.adoptedStyleSheets`.

## Basic example

```ts
import { renderComponent } from '@lwc/ssr-runtime'

const html = await renderComponent('x-foo', Constructor, props, {

>     stylsheetCache: new Set()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    stylesheetCache: new Set()

```

});
```

The above API allows the caller of `renderComponent` to specify a `Set` to be used for deduplicating styles. This `Set` can be pre-populated (e.g. across renders of multiple islands of components), or created fresh.

> After `renderComponent` is called, the `stylesheetCache` (if specified) will be populated with any stylesheets (as strings) that were encountered during rendering.

Reviewer: >will be populated with any stylesheets (as strings)

Do you have an example of how the cache is pre-populated? It's not clear to me how the caller could pre-populate the cache.

### Design

At a high level, we need to give users of the `renderComponent` API a way to specify which stylesheets already exist on the page, and which can be considered by `<lwc-style>` to be available for reuse.

There were various options here, including adding a hook for generating HTML or virtual DOM, or even just asking consumers to use a regex on the generated HTML.

The main complexity here is the need to render something different on the first vs subsquent encounter of a given stylesheet, and to allow reuse across multiple islands. The `Set` neatly solves both cases, as it communicates very clearly whether a stylesheet was already used or not.

### API shape

A new property bag is added to the `renderComponent` API of `@lwc/ssr-runtime`.

```ts
function renderComponent(
    tagName: string, 
    Constructor: LightningElement, 
    props: any,
    // The below is new
    options?: {
        stylesheetCache?: Set<String>;
    }
): void;
```

For the client side, consumers are expected to import the `registerLwcStyleComponent` function and call it once:

```js
import { registerLwcStyleComponent } from '@lwc/ssr-runtime'
registerLwcStyleComponent()

> ```

Reviewer 2: What happens if `registerLwcStyleComponent()` is not called? Will all SSRed components be un-styled?

Author: Correct.

Reviewer: Should this call occur before `hydrateComponent`?

Author: For sure, yes.

FAST has implemented a ["styled component"](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/pull/5600) approach relying on an inline web component to copy styles from a global source into individual components. (Notably this approach has led to [Flash of Unstyled Content issues](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/issues/5906), but this seems to be an implementation issue and not a problem inherent in the design.)

The Microsoft Edge team has [an explainer](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/ShadowDOM/explainer.md) proposing a solution to this problem at the level of HTML, but this is still far from being available cross-browser. And when it is, it is unclear how backwards compatibility with older browsers should work.

#### Non-web-component frameworks

Most non-web-component using frameworks (such as Vue, Svelte, and React) have a system where styles can be extracted from compiled components and are assumed to be hoisted to the document `<head>`. In fact, in Vite, that is what this does:

```js
import './stylesheet.css' // auto-hoists
```

Needless to say, this is insufficient for our use case since LWC has first-class support for shadow DOM components.

## Drawbacks

> This solution will add significant complexity both to the LWC engine (which will have to deal with supporting the new API in SSR, as well as potentially deduplicating styles client-side w.r.t the current CSR implementation) and on the consumer side (which will have to do the bulk of the work of managing and hosting the stylesheets themselves).

Reviewer 2: > consumer side (which will have to do the bulk of the work of managing and hosting the stylesheets themselves)

Does the consumer need to add `<style>` or `<link>` tags to the base doc for each `stylesheetCache` item? Or does the `<lwc-style>` component handle the stylesheets (as long as `registerLwcStyleComponent()` is called on the client)?

Author: No, the consumer does not need to do anything. LWC itself (and notably the `<lwc-style>` component) will 1) render a `<style>` the first time it sees it, and put it in a global cache, and then 2) render nothing the next time, because it can look up the `<style>` via the `style-id` attribute. I'd recommend reading [Rob Eisenberg's design](https://eisenbergeffect.medium.com/sharing-styles-in-declarative-shadow-dom-c5bf84ffd311) which I shamelessly stole.

Reviewer: >on the consumer side (which will have to do the bulk of the work of managing and hosting the stylesheets themselves).

I am confused about this statement relative to the above comments.

Reviewer 2: +1. That statement triggered my original question in this thread.

Author: Invalid sentence from the previous RFC. Removed.

> This solution will add significant complexity both to the LWC engine (which will have to deal with supporting the new API in SSR, as well as potentially deduplicating styles client-side w.r.t the current CSR implementation) and on the consumer side (which will have to do the bulk of the work of managing and hosting the stylesheets themselves).

Author: ```suggestion
This solution will add significant complexity both to the LWC engine (which will have to deal with supporting the new API in SSR, as well as potentially deduplicating styles client-side w.r.t the current CSR implementation) and on the consumer side (which will have to ensure they register the `<lwc-style>` component).

```

FAST has implemented a ["styled component"](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/pull/5600) approach relying on an inline web component to copy styles from a global source into individual components. (Notably this approach has led to [Flash of Unstyled Content issues](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/issues/5906).)

The Microsoft Edge team has [an explainer](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/ShadowDOM/explainer.md) proposing a solution to this problem at the level of HTML, but this is still far from being available cross-browser. And when it is, it is unclear how backwards compatibility with older browsers should work.

#### Non-web-component frameworks

Most non-web-component using frameworks (such as Vue, Svelte, and React) have a system where styles can be extracted from compiled components and are assumed to be hoisted to the document `<head>`. In fact, in Vite, that is what this does:

```js
import './stylesheet.css' // auto-hoists
```

Needless to say, this is insufficient for our use case since LWC has first-class support for shadow DOM components.

## Drawbacks

> This solution will add significant complexity both to the LWC engine (which will have to deal with supporting the new API in SSR, as well as dealing with hydration and mismatch detection on the client) and on the consumer side (which will have to do the bulk of the work of managing and hosting the stylesheets themselves).

Reviewer: Can you explain why this change increases the possibility of hydration mismatch?

Author: Right now the hydration mechanism for `<style>`s is the same as any other DOM element. Whereas if we render `<link>`s then we will need to instruct hydration with something like "If you see a `<style>` with such-and-such text content (e.g. a checksum), then consider it the same as a `<link>` with such-and-such attributes."
